---
layout: post
title: Don't let `cd` slow you down
---

I spend quite a bit of time moving around in the terminal. Naturally, tools like <a href="https://github.com/clvv/fasd" target="_blank">fasd<a/>, <a href="https://github.com/vigneshwaranr/bd" target="_blank">bd</a>, <a href="https://github.com/junegunn/fzf" target="_blank">fzf</a>, <a href="https://github.com/shyiko/dotfiles">etc</a> are at the top of my 'day-to-day usage list'. Unfortunately, <a hred="http://ohmyz.sh/" target="_blank">zsh</a> is nowhere among them. As much as I would love to use it, the majority of Linux distributions still don't have it preinstalled. For me it's a deal breaker. I honestly don't want to get <a href="https://github.com/Russell91/sshrc">homesick</a> every time I `ssh` into some remote machine I have no control over. The obvious shell of choice, given the circumstances, is Bash. Up until recently, there was one thing driving me nuts, though. Namely, absent zsh-style `cd`. But, with <a href="https://github.com/shyiko/commacd" target="_blank">commacd</a> in the game, it's no longer a problem.

So, what is `commacd` exactly? Well, it's basically just a bunch of aliases (`,`, `,,`, and (surprise, surprise!) `,,,`), designed to make navigation faster. The best way to explain each one of them is probably to go through some examples.

Let's start with `,`. Think of it as a `cd` that matches directories by prefixes:
{% highlight sh %}
~$ , des
  => cd Desktop

# move through multiple directories
~$ , /u/l/ce
  => cd /usr/local/Cellar

# allow me to choose directory in case of ambiguous pattern (= multiple choices)
~$ , d
  => 1 Desktop
     2 Downloads
     : <type index of the directory to cd into>

# given two directories jdk7 and jdk8 on the Desktop, cd into jdk8 without hitting interactive mode (the one shown above)
~/github$ , ~/d/j*8
  => cd ~/Desktop/jdk8

# cd into directory having 'esk' somewhere in its name
~/github$ , ~/*esk
  => cd ~/Desktop
{% endhighlight %}

If you often find yourself using `cd ..`, `cd ../..`, ... (in one from or another), you might be interested in `,,`. It has a number of different strategies that can make navigation backward a whole lot easier:

- (no arguments) look for the project (checkout) directory (the one with .git/.hg/.svn in it) and then `cd` into it;
- (one argument) `cd` into the closest parent having its name begin with whatever the value you passed in;
- (two arguments) replace all occurrences of the first value with the second one (in the current path).

{% highlight sh %}
# go all the way up to the project root (in this case, the one that has .git in it)
~/github/lorem/src/public$ ,,
  => cd ~/github/lorem

# cd into to the first parent directory named g*
~/github/vimium/src/public$ ,, g
  => cd ~/github

# substitute jekyll with ghost
~/github/jekyll/test$ ,, jekyll ghost
  => cd ~/github/ghost/test
{% endhighlight %}

The last one is `,,,` (my favorite). Think of it as `,` but from the first (nearest) parent directory having non-empty expansion. It allows quickly jump between multiple directories sharing the same ancestor (not necessarily an immediate one).

{% highlight sh %}
# jump to some other project (in this case, located in ~/github)
~/github/rook/src/public$ ,,, m*binlog
  => cd ~/github/mysql-binlog-connector-java
{% endhighlight %}

Note that all three commands automatically emit `pwd` before the completion (just like `cd -`), which makes it possible to combine them with other tools (without actually changing the working directory):

{% highlight sh %}
$ tail -f `, /v/l/t/l`/catalina.out
  => tail -f /var/lib/tomcat7/logs/catalina.out

/opt/nginx$ `,,, ap/b`/cassandra-cli
  => /opt/apache-cassandra-1.2.1/bin/cassandra-cli
{% endhighlight %}

You can also hit `<Tab>` whenever you want to check where are you about to jump to. Like this:

{% highlight sh %}
$ , /v/l<Tab>
  => (shows 3 possible completions) /var/lib/ /var/lock/ /var/log/

$ , /u/l/ce<Tab>
  => , /usr/local/Cellar/
{% endhighlight %}

To shrink path back use `<Control>-`.

And now, the final part - installation. `commacd` is written in pure Bash (no dependencies on Python/Ruby/Perl, no nothing). Getting it into your shell is as easy as:

{% highlight sh %}
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/shyiko/commacd/master/commacd.bash -o ~/.commacd.bash && echo "source ~/.commacd.bash" >> ~/.bashrc
{% endhighlight %}

After that, open a new terminal session and `,` ahead!

-----

Want to help out? Report issues, suggest improvements/features or, even better, send in a pull request (see <a href="https://github.com/shyiko/commacd">GitHub page</a>). Every bit is helpful.
